PDEP-14: Dedicated string data type for pandas 3.0 (#58551)
pandas-dev/pandas: web/pandas/pdeps/0014-string-dtype.md

# PDEP-14: Dedicated string data type for pandas 3.0

- Created: May 3, 2024
- Status: Under discussion
- Discussion: https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/58551
- Author: [Joris Van den Bossche](https://github.com/jorisvandenbossche)
- Revision: 1

## Abstract

This PDEP proposes to introduce a dedicated string dtype that will be used by
default in pandas 3.0:

> * In pandas 3.0, enable a string dtype (`"str"`) by default, using PyArrow if available

Author: This PDEP only says something about 3.0, and for that it says to "not (yet) making PyArrow a _hard_ dependency, but only a dependency used by default" (see a few lines below). So if there is no decision on PDEP-15 before 3.0, I assume we follow the proposal here _for 3.0_ (i.e. for pandas 3.0 don't yet make pyarrow a required dependency, as it says exactly that), but this PDEP in itself says nothing about what to do after 3.0 (barring any decision on PDEP 15, it essentially just postpones PDEP 10 until after 3.0)

> * In pandas 3.0, enable a string dtype (`"str"`) by default, using PyArrow if available

Reviewer: Makes sense. I think that's a good way of structuring this proposal

already been
[added in pandas 1.0](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.0.0.html#dedicated-string-data-type).
This has always been opt-in for now, requiring users to explicitly request the
dtype (with `dtype="string"` or `dtype=pd.StringDtype()`). The array backing
this string dtype was initially almost the same as the default implementation,
i.e. an `object`-dtype NumPy array of Python strings.

To solve the second issue (performance), pandas contributed to the development
of string kernels in the PyArrow package, and a variant of the string dtype
backed by PyArrow was
[added in pandas 1.3](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.3.0.html#pyarrow-backed-string-data-type).
This could be specified with the `storage` keyword in the opt-in string dtype
(`pd.StringDtype(storage="pyarrow")`).

Since its introduction, the `StringDtype` has always been opt-in, and has used
the experimental `pd.NA` sentinel for missing values (which was also [introduced
in pandas 1.0](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.0.0.html#experimental-na-scalar-to-denote-missing-values)).
However, up to this date, pandas has not yet taken the step to use `pd.NA` by

> default for any dtype, and thus the `StringDtype` deviates in missing value behaviour compared

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
default for all dtypes, and thus the `StringDtype` deviates in missing value behaviour compared
```

`pd.NA` (but this PDEP proposes a better naming scheme, see the "Naming"
subsection below).

This last dtype variant is what users currently (pandas 2.2) get for string data
when enabling the ``future.infer_string`` option (to enable the behaviour which
is intended to become the default in pandas 3.0).

## Proposal

To be able to move forward with a string data type in pandas 3.0, this PDEP proposes:

1. For pandas 3.0, a `"str"` string dtype is enabled by default, which will use PyArrow
   if installed, and otherwise falls back to an in-house functionally-equivalent
   (but slower) version.
2. This default string dtype will follow the same behaviour for missing values
   as other default data types, and use `NaN` as the missing value sentinel.
3. The version that is not backed by PyArrow can reuse (with minor code
   additions) the existing numpy object-dtype backed StringArray for its
   implementation.
4. Installation guidelines are updated to clearly encourage users to install
   pyarrow for the default user experience.

Those string dtypes enabled by default will then no longer be considered as
experimental.

> ### Default inference of a string dtype

Reviewer 2: I think this is item 5 of the "Proposal" above, with details in this section

Author: Sorry, can you clarify? Do you think there should be added an item 5 in the enumeration above? (for me, this falls under item 1, i.e. what it means to have "string dtype enabled by default", that means we use it in inference and in IO)

Reviewer 2: I didn't interpret "is enabled by default" that way, but that's probably because the word "default" is used in many contexts in this PDEP.  So maybe change item 1 to be more explicit about the meaning of "by default", i.e., change:  
"For pandas 3.0, a `"str"` string dtype is enabled by default" to "For pandas 3.0, a `"str"` string dtype is used as the default dtype for all text data, in both inference and I/O operations", or something like that.

Author: > I didn't interpret "is enabled by default" that way,

OK, rephrased this a bit to make that more explicit in the point 1, and then moved the notion of using pyarrow if available to point 3 to combine it with the fallback explanation.

use storage-specific options. Users are expected to specify a generic name (such
as `"str"` or `"string"`), and that will give them their default string dtype
(which depends on whether PyArrow is installed or not).

For the generic string alias to specify the dtype, `"string"` is already used
for the `StringDtype` using `pd.NA`. This PDEP proposes to use `"str"` for the
new default `StringDtype` using `NaN`. This ensures backwards compatibility for
code using `dtype="string"`, and was also chosen because `dtype="str"` or
`dtype=str` currently already works to ensure your data is converted to
strings (only using object dtype for the result).

But for testing purposes and advanced use cases that want control over the exact
variant of the `StringDtype`, we need some way to specify this and distinguish
them from the other string dtypes.

Currently (pandas 2.2), `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow_numpy")` is used for the new variant using `NaN`,
where the `"pyarrow_numpy"` storage was used to disambiguate from the existing
`"pyarrow"` option using `pd.NA`. However, `"pyarrow_numpy"` is a rather confusing
option and doesn't generalize well. Therefore, this PDEP proposes a new naming

> scheme as outlined below, and `"pyarrow_numpy"` will be deprecated and removed
> before pandas 3.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scheme as outlined below, and `"pyarrow_numpy"` will be deprecated in pandas 2.3 and removed
in pandas 3.0.
```

The `storage` keyword of `StringDtype` is kept to disambiguate the underlying
storage of the string data (using pyarrow or python objects), but an additional

> `na_value` is introduced to disambiguate the the variants using NA semantics

Reviewer: The only thing with `na_value` I wonder about is if its worth specifying `na_value=np.nan` or instead using something more generic like `na_handling="legacy"`

The advantage to the latter is it would work with any type, especially as we think about moving towards the logical type system. `pd.DatetimeType(na_value=np.nan)` probably should not exist, so a user would either have to opt in to `pd.DatetimeType(na_value=pd.NaT)` explicitly or gloss over that and just have them use `pd.XXXType(na_handling="legacy")` when they want historical pandas behavior

Author: While it might be a bit more future looking, I personally wouldn't want to call the default behaviour "legacy". That seems like a strange message, because it will potentially only be legacy in 4.0 (or in later 3.x releases if we provide an option to globally opt in to using `pd.NA`). But for most users for 3.0 it is simply the default missing value handling.

Reviewer: Fair point. Not tied to the name. Maybe "hybrid" or "mixed"?

Author: I would personally prefer to keep `na_value` for this proposal. On the short term, that's the most minimal change (the attribute already exists, so we are not adding a new attribute, only exposing it as keyword as well).

We can certainly think of a better or more generic way to handle this in the context of PDEP-13. And if we do so, I think it will be very easy to keep compatibility with the `na_value` keyword just in `StringDtype` (it will be easy to still accept that on the short term and translate that to the proper new keyword), i.e. not much maintenance overhead to keep that working for StringDtype to avoid code churn for users.

(any keyword that we will be adding related to the NA handling will (I hope) be temporary anyway, so also a `na_handling` keyword might at some point get deprecated again)

Reviewer: Fair enough

dtype of the data:

| User specification                          | Concrete dtype                                                | String alias                          | Note     |
|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------|
| Unspecified (inference)                     | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"\|"python", na_value=np.nan)`   | "str"                                 | (1)      |
| `"str"` or `StringDtype(na_value=np.nan)`   | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"\|"python", na_value=np.nan)`   | "str"                                 | (1)      |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`   | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`             | "str"                                 |          |
| `StringDtype("python", na_value=np.nan)`    | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=np.nan)`              | "str"                                 |          |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow")`                    | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)`              | "string[pyarrow]"                     |          |

> | `StringDtype("python")`                     | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=pd.NA)`               | "string[python]"                      |          |

Reviewer 2: Can a user specify `"string[pyarrow]"` and `"string[python]"` as the `dtype` as it works in 2.2 ?

Author: Yes, nothing changes there (it's mentioned in one of the paragraphs below the table that in theory we could also stop supporting the storage in the string alias for those, but that's out of scope for the PDEP). The fact that they are listed in the "String alias" column is meant to indicate that you can use that string as a string alias when specifying a dtype.

Reviewer 2: I think I am confused by the "string alias" aspect.  There are string aliases for specifying the dtype, but also string aliases for representing the dtype (i.e., what you see if you do `Series.dtype`.  I'm not sure that we are completely bidirectional in all of our dtypes with respect to the strings.  

Also, if we are saying that `"str"` will not indicate the storage type, should we not then deprecate the usage of `"string[python]"` and `"string[pyarrow]"` and just make it `"string"` ?  The asymmetry between `"str"` not specifying storage and `"string"` doesn't feel right.

Author: > I think I am confused by the "string alias" aspect. There are string aliases for specifying the dtype, but also string aliases for representing the dtype (i.e., what you see if you do `Series.dtype`. I'm not sure that we are completely bidirectional in all of our dtypes with respect to the strings.

I know, and I had been going back and forth in my draft calling this columm "String alias" vs "Dtype repr", because both are partly overlapping concepts, but then also "dtype repr" is confusing because there is both `__repr__` and `__str__` (eg for `__str__` (used in `df.dtypes`) we always just "string" without the storage suffix).

In the end, this column actually shows the dtype `__repr__`, but which in practice is the most specific string alias one can use to specify the dtype (i.e. for "string[pyarrow]" you can also use "string" if pyarrow is the default storage, but the table already includes too much content).

> Also, if we are saying that `"str"` will not indicate the storage type, should we not then deprecate the usage of `"string[python]"` and `"string[pyarrow]"` and just make it `"string"` ?

As mentioned in my previous comment, a paragraph is included to say this is left for a separate discussion (this would introduce a backwards incompatible change for existing users, while otherwise are not any on this front, and the exact way to indicate backends in string aliases, I would like to defer any final decision about that to the PDEP on logical types)

Reviewer 2: > In the end, this column actually shows the dtype `__repr__`, but which in practice is the most specific string alias one can use to specify the dtype (i.e. for "string[pyarrow]" you can also use "string" if pyarrow is the default storage, but the table already includes too much content).

Maybe relabel "String alias" to "String alias for dtype input" ?

Part of the confusion is this with 2.2:
```python
>>> pd.Series(["abc"], dtype="string[pyarrow]")
0    abc
dtype: string
>>> pd.Series(["abc"], dtype="string[pyarrow]").dtype
string[pyarrow]
>>> pd.Series(["abc"], dtype="string")
0    abc
dtype: string
>>> pd.Series(["abc"], dtype="string").dtype
string[python]
```

When you print a `Series`, it shows the `dtype` as `"string"`, but if you look at the `dtype`, it shows `"string[python]"` or `"string[pyarrow]"`   This is where my confusion is coming from.

Author: > When you print a `Series`, it shows the `dtype` as `"string"`, but if you look at the `dtype`, it shows `"string[python]"` or `"string[pyarrow]"` This is where my confusion is coming from.

Yes, that's the difference between `__repr__` and `__str__` that I mentioned. Now, this is all existing behaviour, but so for the new dtype I am proposing to _not_ have any difference here (both repr and str would show `"str"`)

Reviewer 3: I believe showing the storage in both `__repr__` and `__str__`  is very important. When you work of large Series, you have two main constraints: storage and computation efficiency. python backed and pyarrow backed are much different in these aspects. Whereas pyarrow is the best option most of the time, if you need mutability, python backed strings could be a better option.

Author: @arnaudlegout it's definitely true that there are trade-offs in deciding which option is best (and for now, you will always be able to specify the storage and inspect it through an attribute).

I think the intent at the moment, though, is to consider the default of pyarrow (if installed) as the general default that _almost_ everyone is expected to use, and that we don't incentivize too much to switch to the non-default storage (i.e. that it is more considered as an implementation detail which storage is used, for most users). 
At least that's the sense I got from the discussion here. But more real-world feedback once we actually switch the default in 3.0 will probably give better insights in how big the drawbacks are in workflows heavy on mutability, and to what extent we should more clearly document those trade-offs (at some point we will also have to decide whether to keep the object-dtype based fallback long term, for example when making pyarrow required or when having a numpy string dtype based one).

My personal take on showing the storage in the repr/str is that for _most_ users, I expect that they shouldn't have to care about the exact storage (or even be aware of the concept), and therefore I think it is more confusing to show this by default in the `df.dtypes` or `ser` repr (which both uses the dtype's `__str__`). 
If we do want to show it in the dtype's `__repr__` (to make it more discoverable), I would personally advocate for making the `__repr__` more like a class repr instead of a string alias (eg printing something like `<pandas.StringDtype(storage=...)>` instead of `string[storage]`, to avoid the `[]` use for this).

What exactly the `__repr__` should look like for this new dtype is not included exactly in the PDEP, so feel free to open a new issue to argue for including the storage where we can continue this discussion.

Reviewer 3: done https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/59342

| `"string"` or `StringDtype()`               | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"\|"python", na_value=pd.NA)`    | "string[pyarrow]" or "string[python]" | (1)      |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow_numpy")`              | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`             | "string[pyarrow_numpy]"               | (2)      |

> Notes:

Reviewer: Maybe one more note to add is around `dtype_backend="numpy_nullable"` which will now return a pyarrow-backed string array with pd.NA semantics when pyarrow is installed.

I consider fixing that out of scope for this PDEP, but I think should at least recognize it as an issue for the future

Reviewer: Fair enough - yea probably too detailed to include here

- (1) You get "pyarrow" or "python" depending on pyarrow being installed.
- (2) "pyarrow_numpy" is kept temporarily because this is already in a released

>   version, but we can deprecate it in 2.x and have it removed for 3.0.

Author: ```suggestion
  version, but it will be deprecated it in 2.x and removed for 3.0.
```

For the new default string dtype, only the `"str"` alias can be used to
specify the dtype as a string, i.e. pandas would not provide a way to make the
underlying storage (pyarrow or python) explicit through the string alias. This
string alias is only a convenience shortcut and for most users `"str"` is
sufficient (they don't need to specify the storage), and the explicit
`pd.StringDtype(storage=..., na_value=np.nan)` is still available for more
fine-grained control.

Also for the existing variant using `pd.NA`, specifying the storage through the
string alias could be deprecated, but that is left for a separate decision.

## Alternatives

### Why not delay introducing a default string dtype?

To avoid introducing a new string dtype while other discussions and changes are

> in flux (eventually making pyarrow a required dependency? adopting `pd.NA` as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in flux (eventually making pyarrow a required dependency) adopting `pd.NA` as
```

`pd.StringDtype(na_value=np.nan)` to get the default dtype using `NaN`.
Therefore, the pandas documentation will focus on the usage of `dtype="str"`.

## Backward compatibility

The most visible backwards incompatible change will be that columns with string
data will no longer have an `object` dtype. Therefore, code that assumes
`object` dtype (such as `ser.dtype == object`) will need to be updated. This
change is done as a hard break in a major release, as warning in advance for the
changed inference is deemed too noisy.

To allow testing code in advance, the
`pd.options.future.infer_string = True` option is available for users.

Otherwise, the actual string-specific functionality (such as the `.str` accessor
methods) should generally all keep working as is.

By preserving the current missing value semantics, this proposal is also mostly
backwards compatible on this aspect. When storing strings in object dtype, pandas
however did allow using `None` as the missing value indicator as well (and in
certain cases such as the `shift` method, pandas even introduced this itself).
For all the cases where currently `None` was used as the missing value sentinel,

> this will change to use `NaN` consistently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this will change to consistently use `NaN`.
```

### For existing users of `StringDtype`

Existing code that already opted in to use the `StringDtype` using `pd.NA`
should generally keep working as is. The latest version of this PDEP preserves
the behaviour of `dtype="string"` or `dtype=pd.StringDtype()` to mean the
`pd.NA` variant of the dtype.

It does propose the change the default storage to `"pyarrow"` (if available) for
the opt-in `pd.NA` variant as well, but this should not have much user-visible

> impact.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should say "should have limited, if any, user-visible impact"?

# PDEP-14: Dedicated string data type for pandas 3.0

- Created: May 3, 2024
- Status: Under discussion
- Discussion: https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/58551
- Author: [Joris Van den Bossche](https://github.com/jorisvandenbossche)
- Revision: 1

## Abstract

This PDEP proposes to introduce a dedicated string dtype that will be used by
default in pandas 3.0:

* In pandas 3.0, enable a "string" dtype by default, using PyArrow if available

>   or otherwise the numpy object-dtype alternative.

Author: > You're not proposing that you still get a `numpy` backed array with `object` dtype, right?

Right, definitely not proposing that. I meant the alternative ExtensionArray using numpy object-dtype under the hood. Will need to clarify that.

string objects).

To solve the first issue, a dedicated extension dtype for string data has
already been
[added in pandas 1.0](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.0.0.html#dedicated-string-data-type).
This has always been opt-in for now, requiring users to explicitly request the
dtype (with `dtype="string"` or `dtype=pd.StringDtype()`). The array backing
this string dtype was initially almost the same as the default implementation,
i.e. an `object`-dtype NumPy array of Python strings.

To solve the second issue (performance), pandas contributed to the development
of string kernels in the PyArrow package, and a variant of the string dtype
backed by PyArrow was
[added in pandas 1.3](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.3.0.html#pyarrow-backed-string-data-type).
This could be specified with the `storage` keyword in the opt-in string dtype
(`pd.StringDtype(storage="pyarrow")`).

Since its introduction, the `StringDtype` has always been opt-in, and has used
the experimental `pd.NA` sentinel for missing values (which was also [introduced
in pandas 1.0](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v1.0.0.html#experimental-na-scalar-to-denote-missing-values)).

> However, up to this date, pandas has not yet taken the step to use `pd.NA` by
> default, and thus the `StringDtype` deviates in missing value behaviour compared

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, up to this date, pandas has not yet taken the step to use `pd.NA` by
default for all dtypes, and thus the `StringDtype` deviates in missing value behaviour compared
```

Author: We don't use pd.NA for _any_ default dtype, so not sure the additional "for all dtypes" clause is needed?

Reviewer 2: Maybe say "for any dtypes" - that's a better wording

proposed to start using a PyArrow-backed string dtype by default in pandas 3.0
(i.e. infer this type for string data instead of object dtype). To ensure we
could use the variant of `StringDtype` backed by PyArrow instead of Python
objects (for better performance), it proposed to make `pyarrow` a new required
runtime dependency of pandas.

In the meantime, NumPy has also been working on a native variable-width string
data type, which will be available [starting with NumPy
2.0](https://numpy.org/devdocs/release/2.0.0-notes.html#stringdtype-has-been-added-to-numpy).
This can provide a potential alternative to PyArrow for implementing a string
data type in pandas that is not backed by Python objects.

After acceptance of PDEP-10, two aspects of the proposal have been under
reconsideration:

- Based on user feedback (mostly around installation complexity and size), it
  has been considered to relax the new `pyarrow` requirement to not be a _hard_
  runtime dependency. In addition, NumPy 2.0 could in the future potentially
  reduce the need to make PyArrow a required dependency specifically for a
  dedicated pandas string dtype.

> - The PDEP did not consider the usage of the experimental `pd.NA` as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- PDEP-10 did not consider the usage of the experimental `pd.NA` as a
```

  consequence of adopting one of the existing implementations of the
  `StringDtype`.

For the second aspect, another variant of the `StringDtype` was
[introduced in pandas 2.1](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/whatsnew/v2.1.0.html#whatsnew-210-enhancements-infer-strings)
that is still backed by PyArrow but follows the default missing values semantics
pandas uses for all other default data types (and using `NaN` as the missing
value sentinel) ([GH-54792](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/54792)).
At the time, the `storage` option for this new variant was called
`"pyarrow_numpy"` to disambiguate from the existing `"pyarrow"` option using
`pd.NA` (but this PDEP proposes a better naming scheme, see the "Naming"
subsection below).

> This last dtype variant is what you currently (pandas 2.2) get for string data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This last dtype variant is what users currently (pandas 2.2) get for string data
```

when enabling the ``future.infer_string`` option (to enable the behaviour which
is intended to become the default in pandas 3.0).

## Proposal

To be able to move forward with a string data type in pandas 3.0, this PDEP proposes:

> 1. For pandas 3.0, we enable a "string" dtype by default, which will use PyArrow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. For pandas 3.0,  a "string" dtype is enabled by default, which will use PyArrow
```

   if installed, and otherwise falls back to an in-house functionally-equivalent
   (but slower) version.
2. This default "string" dtype will follow the same behaviour for missing values

>    as our other default data types, and use `NaN` as the missing value sentinel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   as other default data types, and use `NaN` as the missing value sentinel.
```

3. The version that is not backed by PyArrow can reuse (with minor code
   additions) the existing numpy object-dtype backed StringArray for its
   implementation.

> 4. We update installation guidelines to clearly encourage users to install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Installation guidelines are updated to clearly encourage users to install
```

   pyarrow for the default user experience.

Those string dtypes enabled by default will then no longer be considered as
experimental.

### Default inference of a string dtype

By default, pandas will infer this new string dtype instead of object dtype for
string data (when creating pandas objects, such as in constructors or IO
functions).

The existing `future.infer_string` option can be used to opt-in to the future
default behaviour:

```python
>>> pd.options.future.infer_string = True
>>> pd.Series(["a", "b", None])
0      a
1      b
2    NaN
dtype: string
```

> This option will be expanded to also work when PyArrow is not installed.

Reviewer 2: This is a little unclear.  Today, the existing `future.infer_string` option can be used to opti-in to the future default behavior.  Then you say "This option will be expanded...".  Is that option expanded for pandas 2.3?  Also, in pandas 3.0, wouldn't the `future.infer_string` option no longer exist?

Author: Yes, will clarify. The current (as in, current main branch and released pandas) option only works in case pyarrow is installed, because it enables using the pyarrow-backed string dtype by default. So for the remaing (transition) period in 2.x, we have to make that option work with the fallback as well (for when pyarrow is not installed). In the future pandas 3.0, that option will indeed no longer exist (in practice, we probably will keep it around for a bit with a deprecation warning, but it will no longer have any effect).

```suggestion
Right now (pandas 2.2), the existing option only enables the PyArrow-based
future dtype. For the remaining 2.x releases, this option will be expanded to
also work when PyArrow is not installed to enable the object-dtype fallback in
that case.
```

### Missing value semantics

As mentioned in the background section, the original `StringDtype` has used
the experimental `pd.NA` sentinel for missing values. In addition to using
`pd.NA` as the scalar for a missing value, this essentially means
that:

- String columns follow ["NA-semantics"](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/missing_data.html#na-semantics)
  for missing values, where `NA` propagates in boolean operations such as
  comparisons or predicates.
- Operations on the string column that give a numeric or boolean result use the
  nullable Integer/Float/Boolean data types (e.g. `ser.str.len()` returns the
  nullable `'Int64"` / `pd.Int64Dtype()` dtype instead of the numpy `int64`
  dtype (or `float64` in case of missing values)).

> However, up to this date, all other default data types still use NaN semantics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, up to this date, all other default data types still use `NaN` semantics
```

for missing values. Therefore, this proposal says that a new default string
dtype should also still use the same default missing value semantics and return
default data types when doing operations on the string column, to be consistent
with the other default dtypes at this point.

In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

> the missing value sentinel, and:

Reviewer 2: Interestingly, I don't think the current `object` behavior always uses `NaN`:
```python
>>> sn = pd.Series(["abc", "defg", "hijkl"])
>>> sn
0      abc
1     defg
2    hijkl
dtype: object
>>> sn.shift(1)
0    None
1     abc
2    defg
dtype: object
>>> sn.shift(1).iloc[0] is None
```
So at least with the `shift()` operation, the "missing value" is `None`, not `np.nan`

Author: Yeah, we are not really consistent with this. When created, we will consider any null-like (None, NaN, NaT, NA) as a missing value in an object-dtype column, but for methods introducing them I would have hoped we were consistent. But apparently not:

```python
>>> ser = pd.Series(["a", "b", "c"], dtype=object)
>>> ser.shift(1)
0    None
1       a
2       b
dtype: object
>>> ser.reindex([1, 2, 3])
1      b
2      c
3    NaN
dtype: object
```

And to be clear, this will all be NaN with the future string dtype (whether converted to NaN upon construction, or ensuring we use NaN for missing values introduced in methods)

Reviewer 2: The fact that we're not consistent today does suggest that with this proposal (using `np.nan` as the default missing value indicator for strings), that there _will_ be a behavior change for people using `dtype=object` today with strings, because we'd replace `None` with `np.nan` in `shift()` (and maybe elsewhere)

Author: Mentioned this in the backwards compatibility section

  False in boolean operations such as comparisons or predicates.
- Operations on the string column that give a numeric or boolean result will use
  the default data types (i.e. numpy `int64`/`float64`/`bool`).

Because the original `StringDtype` implementations already use `pd.NA` and
return masked integer and boolean arrays in operations, a new variant of the
existing dtypes that uses `NaN` and default data types was needed. The original
variant of `StringDtype` using `pd.NA` will still be available for those who
want to keep using it (see below in the "Naming" subsection for how to specify
this).

### Object-dtype "fallback" implementation

To avoid a hard dependency on PyArrow for pandas 3.0, this PDEP proposes to keep
a "fallback" option in case PyArrow is not installed. The original `StringDtype`
backed by a numpy object-dtype array of Python strings can be mostly reused for
this (adding a new variant of the dtype) and a new `StringArray` subclass only
needs minor changes to follow the above-mentioned missing value semantics
([GH-58451](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/58451)).

For pandas 3.0, this is the most realistic option given this implementation has

> already been available for a long time. Beyond 3.0, we can still explore further
> improvements such as using NumPy 2.0 ([GH-58503](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58503))
> or nanoarrow ([GH-58552](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58552)),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
already been available for a long time. Beyond 3.0,  further
improvements such as using NumPy 2.0 ([GH-58503](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58503))
or nanoarrow ([GH-58552](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58552))
can still be explored,
```

but at that point that is an implementation detail that should not have a
direct impact on users (except for performance).

### Naming

Given the long history of this topic, the naming of the dtypes is a difficult
topic.

> In the first place, we need to acknowledge that most users should not need to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first place, it should be acknowledged that most users should not need to
```

use storage-specific options. Users are expected to specify `pd.StringDtype()`
or `"string"`, and that will give them their default string dtype (which
depends on whether PyArrow is installed or not).

But for testing purposes and advanced use cases that want control over this, we
need some way to specify this and distinguish them from the other string dtypes.
In addition, users that want to continue using the original NA-variant of the
dtype need a way to specify this.

Currently (pandas 2.2), `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow_numpy")` is used, where
the `"pyarrow_numpy"` storage was used to disambiguate from the existing
`"pyarrow"` option using `pd.NA`. However, "pyarrow_numpy" is a rather
confusing option and doesn't generalize well. Therefore, this PDEP proposes

> a new naming scheme as outlined below, and we will deprecate and remove
> "pyarrow_numpy" before pandas 3.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a new naming scheme as outlined below, and 
"pyarrow_numpy" will be deprecated and removed before pandas 3.0.
```

| `StringDtype()` or `"string"`              | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"|"python", na_value=np.nan)` | "string"                | (1), (2)  |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow")`                 | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`           | "string"                | (2)     |
| `StringDtype("python")`                  | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=np.nan)`            | "string"                | (2)     |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)` | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)`            | "string[pyarrow]"       |      |
| `StringDtype("python", na_value=pd.NA)`  | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)`            | "string[python]"        |      |
| `StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)`            | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"|"python", na_value=pd.NA)` | "string[pyarrow]" or "string[python]" | (1)  |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow_numpy")`           | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`           | "string[pyarrow_numpy]" | (3)  |

Notes:

- (1) You get "pyarrow" or "python" depending on pyarrow being installed.
- (2) Those three rows are backwards incompatible (i.e. they work now but give

>   you the NA-variant), see the "Backward compatibility" section below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the NA-variant), see the "Backward compatibility" section below.
```

- (3) "pyarrow_numpy" is kept temporarily because this is already in a released

>   version, but we can deprecate it in 2.2.x and have it removed for 3.0.

Reviewer 2: I think we'd have to deprecate in 2.3  not a 2.2.x ?

>   version, but we can deprecate it in 2.2.x and have it removed for 3.0.

Author: ```suggestion
  version, but we can deprecate it in 2.x and have it removed for 3.0.
```

Made this more general as "2.x" to leave the details about the exact release for the sections about backwards compatibility and timeline below (where I think I indeed mention to do this in a 2.3.0 release now)

For the new default string dtype, only the `"string"` alias can be used to

> specify the dtype as a string, i.e. we would not provide a way to make the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specify the dtype as a string, i.e. a way would not be provided to make the
```

underlying storage (pyarrow or python) explicit through the string alias. This
string alias is only a convenience shortcut and for most users `"string"` is
sufficient (they don't need to specify the storage), and the explicit

> `pd.StringDtype(...)` is still available for more fine-grained control.

Reviewer 2: I think a user should be able to specify `dtype="String"`, and then they get the equivalent of `StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)`

Author: I updated the proposal to mention the addition of a `"String"` string alias for the NA-variant (it's mentioned below in the backwards compatibility section)

## Alternatives

### Why not delay introducing a default string dtype?

To avoid introducing a new string dtype while other discussions and changes are
in flux (eventually making pyarrow a required dependency? adopting `pd.NA` as
the default missing value sentinel? using the new NumPy 2.0 capabilities?

> overhauling all our dtypes to use a logical data type system?), we could also
> delay introducing a default string dtype until there is more clarity in those

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
overhauling all our dtypes to use a logical data type system?), 
introducing a default string dtype could also be delayed until there is more clarity in those
```

other discussions.

However:

1. Delaying has a cost: it further postpones introducing a dedicated string

>    dtype that has massive benefits for our users, both in usability as (for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   dtype that has massive benefits for users, both in usability as (for the
```

>    significant part of the user base that has PyArrow installed) in performance.

Reviewer 2: I don't know if you can say "significant" yet.  I would delete that word.

Author: > I don't know if you can say "significant" yet. I would delete that word.

Deleted it.

> 2. In case we eventually transition to use `pd.NA` as the default missing value
>    sentinel, we will need a migration path for _all_ our data types, and thus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In case an eventual transition is introduced to use `pd.NA` as the default missing value
   sentinel,  a migration path for _all_ our data types will be needed, and thus
```

   the challenges around this will not be unique to the string dtype and
   therefore not a reason to delay this.

> Making this change now for 3.0 will benefit the majority of our users, while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Making this change now for 3.0 will benefit the majority of users, while
```

coming at a cost for a part of the users who already started using the

> `"string"` dtype (they will have to update their code to continue to the variant

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`"string"` or `pd.StringDtype()` dtype (they will have to update their code to continue to the variant
```

_default_ experience, a user will only see only 1 kind of integer dtype, only
kind of 1 bool dtype, etc. For now, a user should only get columns using `pd.NA`
when explicitly opting into this.

### Naming alternatives

This PDEP now keeps the `pd.StringDtype` class constructor with the existing
`storage` keyword and with an additional `na_value` keyword.

During the discussion, several alternatives have been brought up. Both
alternative keyword names as using a different constructor. This PDEP opted to
keep using the existing `pd.StringDtype()` for now to keep the changes as
minimal as possible, leaving a larger overhaul of the dtype system (potentially
including different constructor functions or namespace) for a future discussion.
See [GH-58613](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58613) for the full
discussion.

## Backward compatibility

The most visible backwards incompatible change will be that columns with string
data will no longer have an `object` dtype. Therefore, code that assumes
`object` dtype (such as `ser.dtype == object`) will need to be updated. This
change is done as a hard break in a major release, as warning in advance for the

> changed inference is deemed to noisy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
changed inference is deemed too noisy.
```

To allow testing your code in advance, the

> `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` option is available.

Reviewer 2: By "in advance", you mean in advance of 3.0, right?  If so, the PDEP should specify if this option will remain in 3.0.

> To allow testing your code in advance, the
> `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` option is available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To allow testing code in advance, the
`pd.options.future.infer_string = True` option is available for users.
```

missing value semantics, this proposal is also backwards compatible on this
aspect.

### For existing users of `StringDtype`

Users of the existing `StringDtype` will see more backwards incompatible
changes, though. In pandas 3.0, calling `pd.StringDtype()` (or specifying
`dtype="string"`) will start returning the new default string dtype using `NaN`,
while up to now this returned the string dtype using `pd.NA` introduced in
pandas 1.0.

For example, this code snippet returned the NA-variant of `StringDtype` with
pandas 1.x and 2.x:

```python
>>> pd.Series(["a", "b", None], dtype="string")
0      a
1      b
2   <NA>
dtype: string
```

but will start returning the new default NaN-variant of `StringDtype` with
pandas 3.0. This means that the missing value sentinel will change from `pd.NA`
to `NaN`, and that operations will no longer return nullable dtypes but default
numpy dtypes (see the "Missing value semantics" section above).

While this change will be transparent in many cases (e.g. checking for missing
values with `isna()`/`dropna()`/`fillna()` or filtering rows with the result of
a string predicate method keeps working regardless of the sentinel), this can be

> a breaking change if you relied on the exact sentinel or resulting dtype. Since

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a breaking change if users relied on the exact sentinel or resulting dtype. Since
```

pandas 1.0, the string dtype has been promoted quite a bit, and so we expect
that many users already have started using this dtype, even though officially

> still labeled as "experimental".

Reviewer 2: Somewhere the PDEP has to say what the behavior of `convert_dtypes()` will be.  One nice feature of that method is that it converts all arrays to use `pd.NA` missing value semantics.  Would that still be true?

Author: The `convert_dtypes()` method is for "convert to dtypes supporting ``pd.NA``", and given this PDEP does not propose anything about such dtypes itself (apart from the class constructor interface of `StringDtype`), this PDEP also does not have any impact on the usage of `convert_dtypes`.

The `infer_objects()` method will start inferring the new string dtype.

Reviewer 2: OK

> To smooth the upgrade experience for those users, we propose to add a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To smooth the upgrade experience for those users, it is proposed to add a
```

deprecation warning before 3.0 when such dtype is created, giving them two
options:

- If the user just wants to have a dedicated "string" dtype (or the better
  performance when using pyarrow) but is fine with using the default NaN
  semantics, they can add `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` to their code
  to suppress the warning and already opt-in to the future behaviour of pandas
  3.0.
- If the user specifically wants the variant of the string dtype that uses
  `pd.NA` (and returns nullable numeric/boolean dtypes in operations), they will
  have to update their dtype specification from `"string"` / `pd.StringDtype()`
  to `pd.StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)` to suppress the warning and further keep
  their code running as is.

## Timeline

The future PyArrow-backed string dtype was already made available behind a feature
flag in pandas 2.1 (enabled by `pd.options.future.infer_string = True`).

Some small enhancements or fixes might still be needed and can continue to be

> backported to pandas 2.2.x.

Reviewer 2: I think those fixes should be in a 2.3

Author: While it seems we haven't had any fixes yet in 2.2.x, we merged several fixes for the future default string dtype mode in 2.1.x (after the initial 2.1.0 release). I would think we can continue doing that for fixes, but can also just leave out this sentence if there is disagreement. 

(I think the general rule of this being discussed on a PR basis whether it should be backported or not, depending on how critical the fix is, would apply here, and so that maybe doesn't require explicit mentioning)

Author: > I think those fixes should be in a 2.3

Removed this sentence.

The variant using numpy object-dtype can also be backported to the 2.2.x branch

> to allow easier testing. We would propose to release this as 2.3.0 (created from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to allow easier testing. It is proposed to release this as 2.3.0 (created from
```

However, up to this date, pandas has not yet taken the step to use `pd.NA` by
default for any dtype, and thus the `StringDtype` deviates in missing value behaviour compared
to the default data types.

In 2023, [PDEP-10](https://pandas.pydata.org/pdeps/0010-required-pyarrow-dependency.html)
proposed to start using a PyArrow-backed string dtype by default in pandas 3.0
(i.e. infer this type for string data instead of object dtype). To ensure we
could use the variant of `StringDtype` backed by PyArrow instead of Python
objects (for better performance), it proposed to make `pyarrow` a new required
runtime dependency of pandas.

In the meantime, NumPy has also been working on a native variable-width string
data type, which will be available [starting with NumPy
2.0](https://numpy.org/devdocs/release/2.0.0-notes.html#stringdtype-has-been-added-to-numpy).
This can provide a potential alternative to PyArrow for implementing a string
data type in pandas that is not backed by Python objects.

After acceptance of PDEP-10, two aspects of the proposal have been under
reconsideration:

> - Based on user feedback (mostly around installation complexity and size), it

Reviewer 4: I'd include "feedback from maintainers of other packages" too

when enabling the ``future.infer_string`` option (to enable the behaviour which
is intended to become the default in pandas 3.0).

## Proposal

To be able to move forward with a string data type in pandas 3.0, this PDEP proposes:

1. For pandas 3.0,  a "string" dtype is enabled by default, which will use PyArrow
   if installed, and otherwise falls back to an in-house functionally-equivalent
   (but slower) version.
2. This default "string" dtype will follow the same behaviour for missing values
   as other default data types, and use `NaN` as the missing value sentinel.
3. The version that is not backed by PyArrow can reuse (with minor code
   additions) the existing numpy object-dtype backed StringArray for its
   implementation.
4. Installation guidelines are updated to clearly encourage users to install
   pyarrow for the default user experience.

Those string dtypes enabled by default will then no longer be considered as
experimental.

### Default inference of a string dtype

By default, pandas will infer this new string dtype instead of object dtype for
string data (when creating pandas objects, such as in constructors or IO
functions).

> The existing `future.infer_string` option can be used to opt-in to the future

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In pandas2.2, the existing `future.infer_string` option can be used to opt-in to the future
```
Helps clarify based on your response at https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/58551#discussion_r1598660753

that case.

### Missing value semantics

As mentioned in the background section, the original `StringDtype` has used
the experimental `pd.NA` sentinel for missing values. In addition to using
`pd.NA` as the scalar for a missing value, this essentially means
that:

- String columns follow ["NA-semantics"](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/missing_data.html#na-semantics)
  for missing values, where `NA` propagates in boolean operations such as
  comparisons or predicates.
- Operations on the string column that give a numeric or boolean result use the
  nullable Integer/Float/Boolean data types (e.g. `ser.str.len()` returns the
  nullable `'Int64"` / `pd.Int64Dtype()` dtype instead of the numpy `int64`
  dtype (or `float64` in case of missing values)).

However, up to this date, all other default data types still use `NaN` semantics
for missing values. Therefore, this proposal says that a new default string
dtype should also still use the same default missing value semantics and return
default data types when doing operations on the string column, to be consistent
with the other default dtypes at this point.

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Author: > I'm still -1 on changing this behavior; I do not want to revert "string" back to NumPy nullability semantics

For clarification, do you mean "-1 on using NaN semantics for the default string dtype, regardless of how we name it", or only "-1 on using NaN semantics for the dtype created as `dtype="string"`" ? 

Because it is only the latter that causes the breaking change for anyone already using the nullable string dtype. Assume we would use a different name or different string alias than "string", we could still have a default string dtype (which everyone that was not yet using the nullable `StringDtype` would get by default) that uses the proposed NaN semantics, while not causing a breaking change for the existing users of `dtype="string"` / `dtype=pd.StringDtype()`.

(it's another question whether there is enough support for using a different name, I personally think "string" is the best choice which we should reserve for the default dtype, but first to get a good understanding of your position)

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: > For clarification, do you mean "-1 on using NaN semantics for the default string dtype, regardless of how we name it", or only "-1 on using NaN semantics for the dtype created as `dtype="string"`" ?

Definitely the latter, maybe the former. My expectation with PDEP-10 was that the default pyarrow string would be using pd.NA. If that is too difficult then yea there probably is a compromise on the former, but I do not want to take away the `dtype="string"` functionality from users that has been working all of this time.

Not that it is ideal, but we already have `dtype=str` today and `dtype="string"`; maybe the former becomes the new name for what is being proposed here instead of `string[pyarrow_numpy]` and only change `dtype="string"` to be pyarrow backed without changing nullability semantics?

That doesn't solve the str/"string" discrepancy but I don't think introduces any new problems either

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Author: >  I do not want to take away the `dtype="string"` functionality from users that has been working all of this time.

We are not "taking away" that functionality, the current revision of the PDEP only asks users to use `dtype=pd.StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)` instead to continue using the same functionality, and Irv's suggestion would minimize the required code change to use `dtype="String"`

> Not that it is ideal, but we already have `dtype=str` today and `dtype="string"`; maybe the former becomes the new name for what is being proposed here instead of `string[pyarrow_numpy]`

Then what would you propose to show in the `df.dtypes` output? (i.e. the string repr of the dtype) Also "str" instead of "string"? 
That would be an option. In that case, we could also use a separate `StrDtype()` class for those NaN-variants (which also solves the back compat issue for `dtype=pd.StringDtype()`).

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: > Then what would you propose to show in the `df.dtypes` output? (i.e. the string repr of the dtype) Also "str" instead of "string"?

Yea I think this would work. Not saying its an ideal place to be, but I don't think its all that different from what we have today, doesn't require end user changes, and doesn't require a new constructor

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: > In that case, we could also use a separate `StrDtype()` class for those NaN-variants (which also solves the back compat issue for `dtype=pd.StringDtype()`).

Interesting idea, but I think I'm -0.5 on doing that. The proposal here is more in line with PDEP-13's notion of logical types and can segue into that. I think having `pd.StrDtype()` and `pd.StringDtype()` only moves us away from that.

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer 2: > Interesting idea, but I think I'm -0.5 on doing that. The proposal here is more in line with PDEP-13's notion of logical types and can segue into that. I think having `pd.StrDtype()` and `pd.StringDtype()` only moves us away from that.

I'm not sure I agree with you here @WillAyd .  If we had both, and we do logical dtypes, then we pick one or the other.  Similar to how we have to reconcile `dtype=int` versus `dtype=pd.Int64Dtype()` in the future if we use logical types, which would also need to reconcile the `NaN` vs `pd.NA` issue.

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: The idea is that the logical type is decoupled from null handling. If you ignored missing values for a minute, what value do you think there is in having a separate `Str` and `String` type in a type system?

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer 2: > The idea is that the logical type is decoupled from null handling. If you ignored missing values for a minute, what value do you think there is in having a separate `Str` and `String` type in a type system?

No value in a type system.  I just think it may be useful to have this now so we can manage the transition from where we are today to 3.0, and from 3.0 to a future state.

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: This is something we can discuss further in PDEP-13 but the current revision of it proposes consistently having the format of `<TYPE>Dtype(na_marker=pd.NA|"legacy")`, the idea being that long term pd.NA can be used consistently, but we will have a compatability period of "legacy" where you get the mix of np.nan / pd.NaT for NumPy-based types (and still probably pd.NA for any new types).

So `StringDtype(na_marker=np.nan)` is slightly different from that. Maybe asking users to explicitly say `np.nan` instead of `"legacy"` has some downsides from a UI perspective, but my gut feeling is that isn't something we can't solve over time

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: I do want to be wary though of users expecting complete control over the `na_marker` field. I don't see a value-add in trying to support `DatetimeDtype(na_marker=np.nan)` alongside `DatetimeDtype(na_marker=pd.NaT)` nor do I think there would ever be value in `ListDtype(na_marker=np.nan)`

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Author: > I do want to be wary though of users expecting complete control over the `na_marker` field.

I definitely agree users shouldn't expect complete control over the `na_marker` or `na_value` field. This is not a custom value that can be anything, and we indeed don't want to generalize that to other dtypes in the future. 

Because of that, I have been thinking to not actually allow a user to specify `StringDtype(na_marker=np.nan)` explicitly, but only allow the implicit default of `StringDtype()` (using NaN) or the explicit choice to not have the default with `StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)`. 
Just to avoid users actually doing `StringDtype(na_marker=np.nan)` (while that is not necessary, when it is possible users will still do it), and thinking this will generalize to other dtypes.

> In practice, this means that the default `"string"` dtype will use `NaN` as

Reviewer: I am still overall -1 on changing the default from pd.NA back to np.nan. The latter is not generalizable (not even in our current design) so I don't see how we can consider that the long term solution

already been available for a long time. Beyond 3.0, further improvements such as
using NumPy 2.0 ([GH-58503](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58503))
or nanoarrow ([GH-58552](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/58552)) can
still be explored, but at that point that is an implementation detail that
should not have a direct impact on users (except for performance).

### Naming

Given the long history of this topic, the naming of the dtypes is a difficult
topic.

In the first place, it should be acknowledged that most users should not need to
use storage-specific options. Users are expected to specify `pd.StringDtype()`
or `"string"`, and that will give them their default string dtype (which
depends on whether PyArrow is installed or not).

But for testing purposes and advanced use cases that want control over this, we
need some way to specify this and distinguish them from the other string dtypes.
In addition, users that want to continue using the original NA-variant of the
dtype need a way to specify this.

Currently (pandas 2.2), `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow_numpy")` is used, where
the `"pyarrow_numpy"` storage was used to disambiguate from the existing

> `"pyarrow"` option using `pd.NA`. However, "pyarrow_numpy" is a rather confusing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`"pyarrow"` option using `pd.NA`. However, `"pyarrow_numpy"` is a rather confusing
```

option and doesn't generalize well. Therefore, this PDEP proposes a new naming

> scheme as outlined below, and "pyarrow_numpy" will be deprecated and removed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scheme as outlined below, and `"pyarrow_numpy"` will be deprecated and removed
```

before pandas 3.0.

> The `storage` keyword of `StringDtype` is kept to disambiguate the underlying

Reviewer: I don't have an alternate proposal but I think our naming is even more confusing with this when using the `dtype_backend="numpy_nullable"` argument in I/O. 

I assume that will yield `pd.StringDtype("pyarrow", na_marker=pd.NA)` or `pd.StringDtype("python", na_marker=pd.NA)` in this proposal but never `pd.StringDtype(..., na_marker=np.nan)`, so even though it is `numpy_nullable` it never uses NumPy nullability

Author: > so even though it is `numpy_nullable` it never uses NumPy nullability

I am not going to argue this is a good name (I never liked this), but this option right now does mean "give me dtypes with NA semantics (implemented using numpy under the hood, instead of using pyarrow)", and so yes it will give you the NA-variant of the dtype.

This option does not mean to ask for Numpy-like (NaN) nullability semantics. That can be confusing, but then that is the case in general, and not related to just the string dtype.

storage of the string data (using pyarrow or python objects), but an additional

> `na_value` is introduced to disambiguate the the variants using NA semantics

Reviewer 5: Maybe silly question but `na_value` can only ever be `np.nan` or `pd.NA`?

Author: Yes, it's not meant to be a custom user-provided value, just to choose between those two options.

specify the dtype as a string, i.e. a way would not be provided to make the
underlying storage (pyarrow or python) explicit through the string alias. This
string alias is only a convenience shortcut and for most users `"string"` is
sufficient (they don't need to specify the storage), and the explicit
`pd.StringDtype(...)` is still available for more fine-grained control.

## Alternatives

### Why not delay introducing a default string dtype?

To avoid introducing a new string dtype while other discussions and changes are
in flux (eventually making pyarrow a required dependency? adopting `pd.NA` as
the default missing value sentinel? using the new NumPy 2.0 capabilities?
overhauling all our dtypes to use a logical data type system?), introducing a
default string dtype could also be delayed until there is more clarity in those
other discussions.

However:

1. Delaying has a cost: it further postpones introducing a dedicated string
   dtype that has massive benefits for users, both in usability as (for the
   significant part of the user base that has PyArrow installed) in performance.
2. In case pandas eventually transitions to use `pd.NA` as the default missing value

>    sentinel,  a migration path for _all_ our data types will be needed, and thus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   sentinel,  a migration path for _all_ pandas data types will be needed, and thus
```

to `NaN`, and that operations will no longer return nullable dtypes but default
numpy dtypes (see the "Missing value semantics" section above).

While this change will be transparent in many cases (e.g. checking for missing
values with `isna()`/`dropna()`/`fillna()` or filtering rows with the result of
a string predicate method keeps working regardless of the sentinel), this can be
a breaking change if users relied on the exact sentinel or resulting dtype. Since
pandas 1.0, the string dtype has been promoted quite a bit, and so we expect
that many users already have started using this dtype, even though officially
still labeled as "experimental".

To smooth the upgrade experience for those users, it is proposed to add a
deprecation warning before 3.0 when such dtype is created, giving them two
options:

- If the user just wants to have a dedicated "string" dtype (or the better
  performance when using pyarrow) but is fine with using the default NaN
  semantics, they can add `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` to their code
  to suppress the warning and already opt-in to the future behaviour of pandas

>   3.0.

Reviewer 6: It doesn't appear to me this is sufficient. Users may already be opting into Pyarrow-backed strings using this option, right? In which case they will never see a warning that the NA value will change under this proposal.

We could add an option like `default_na_value`. It would only be utilized in cases where the NA value is unspecified. Users could specify `np.nan`, `pd.NA`, or leave it unspecified. When unspecified, we'd have two cases:

 - User not using `dtype="string"` et al. They would not see any warnings, and in 3.0 get NaN semantics (either Pyarrow or NumPy storage, depending on if Pyarrow is installed).
 - User using `dtype="string"` et al. They would see a warning that the default will change in 3.0 to NaN, and they can silence it by specifying what NA value they want.

If/when we are ready to switch over to NA semantics, this option could be used for that purpose as well.

I would also be okay with @WillAyd's proposal to use `str` for the new default, and keep `string` to use `pd.NA`, but prefer changing `string` to use NaN. While it is asking users already using NA-semantics to make a change, it seems to me the change will be straightforward.

Author: > Users may already be opting into Pyarrow-backed strings using this option, right? In which case they will never see a warning that the NA value will change under this proposal.

Which option do you mean exactly? The `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` one? In that case, that is fine and the goal is indeed they don't see a warning, because when enabling this option, you _already_ get a NaN-variant of the string dtype.

(remember that we are in the somewhat strange situation where I am writing a PDEP to formalize behaviour that is partly (the `pd.StringDtype(storage="pyarrow_numpy")`) already in a released pandas version .. but also partly not. So some things I describe in this PDEP are already in main (and would be removed if this PDEP was rejected, I assume), some other things in this PDEP describe new behaviours to implement)

> * User using `dtype="string"` et al. They would see a warning that the default will change in 3.0 to NaN, and they can silence it by specifying what NA value they want.

With the current proposal, they can already silence it by setting the `pd.options.future.infer_string = True`, _in case they want the NaN variant_. 
It's true that it might be nice that there is also an option for the other case (so they don't have to change every dtype specification in their code). But I think I strongly prefer that for the default case (the NaN variant), this user API for this does not involve explicitly choosing NaN (like `pd.options.mode.default_na_value = np.nan`), because that is not a choice most users should make explicitly, it's simply the default missing value sentinel.

At some point we had an option to globally opt-in to our nullable NA-dtypes (https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/50748, https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/29752), but that was later removed again in favor of just keeping a keyword in the IO methods (https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/51433, https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/51853/).  
I think we will need such an option again when we start discussing how to migrate to all NA dtypes, but I would leave that until that point (if we did add an option right now that only worked for strings, then why wouldn't it already also work for the numeric and boolean nullable dtypes we also already have? That would seem strange to me)

Reviewer: > I think we will need such an option again when we start discussing how to migrate to all NA dtypes, but I would leave that until that point

Yea I agree on keeping that out of scope. FWIW the latest revision of PDEP-13 proposes an `na_marker` option that defaults to pd.NA but can be set to "legacy" for np.nan / pd.NaT (and probably still pd.NA), so something we can discuss further there too. I was unaware of the historical option

Reviewer 6: > Which option do you mean exactly? The `pd.options.future.infer_string = True` one? In that case, that is fine and the goal is indeed they don't see a warning, because when enabling this option, you _already_ get a NaN-variant of the string dtype.

:facepalm: I forgot it was the NaN variant. Thanks.

> At some point we had an option to globally opt-in to our nullable NA-dtypes... but that was later removed... I think we will need such an option again when we start discussing how to migrate to all NA dtypes, but I would leave that until that point

Agreed.

still be explored, but at that point that is an implementation detail that
should not have a direct impact on users (except for performance).

For the original variant of `StringDtype` using `pd.NA`, currently the default
storage is `"python"` (the object-dtype based implementation). Also for this

> variant, it is proposed follow the same logic for determining the default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variant, it is proposed to follow the same logic for determining the default
```

> storage, i.e. the default to `"pyarrow"` if available, and otherwise

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
storage, i.e. default to `"pyarrow"` if available, and otherwise
```

|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------|
| Unspecified (inference)                  | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"\|"python", na_value=np.nan)`   | "string"                              | (1)      |
| `StringDtype()` or `"string"`            | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow" \| "python", na_value=np.nan)` | "string"                              | (1), (2) |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow")`                 | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`             | "string"                              | (2)      |
| `StringDtype("python")`                  | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=np.nan)`              | "string"                              | (2)      |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)` | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)`              | "string[pyarrow]"                     |          |
| `StringDtype("python", na_value=pd.NA)`  | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=pd.NA)`               | "string[python]"                      |          |

> | `StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)`            | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow" \| "python", na_value=pd.NA)`  | "string[pyarrow]" or "string[python]" | (1)      |

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this include `"String"` as the string alias?  

If the goal is to just list the string alias that we show as the `dtype` of the column,  it's fine, but maybe the "String alias" column should say "String representation of dtype" and then you have a column called "User string alias" that would include all the aliases a user could use to specify the `dtype`, which would include `"String"`

In addition, maybe consider that the NA variants return `"String[pyarrow]"` or `"String[python]"` as the `dtype` which makes it clear that it is using the `pd.NA` variant via capitalization.

Author: Yeah, I wasn't entirely sure how to integrate `"String"` without making the table even more complex ..

Now, I can indeed change  `"string[python]"` / `"string[pyarow]"` to the capitalized version `"String[python]"` / `"String[python]"`, and mention `"String"` in the first column as alias for `pd.StringDtype(na_value=pd.NA)`

I was originally planning to keep `"string[python]"` / `"string[pyarow]"` mean what it does today for backwards compatibility (and since I mention that this is not allowed for the new NaN-variant of the dtype). Now that I updated the proposal to use capitalized `"String"` for the NA-variant, that of course makes things a bit confusing if the lower case versions with explicit storage in the alias still means the NA-variant ..

| `StringDtype("pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`   | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`             | "str"                                 |          |
| `StringDtype("python", na_value=np.nan)`    | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=np.nan)`              | "str"                                 |          |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow")`                    | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=pd.NA)`              | "string[pyarrow]"                     |          |
| `StringDtype("python")`                     | `StringDtype(storage="python", na_value=pd.NA)`               | "string[python]"                      |          |
| `"string"` or `StringDtype()`               | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow"\|"python", na_value=pd.NA)`    | "string[pyarrow]" or "string[python]" | (1)      |
| `StringDtype("pyarrow_numpy")`              | `StringDtype(storage="pyarrow", na_value=np.nan)`             | "string[pyarrow_numpy]"               | (2)      |

Notes:

- (1) You get "pyarrow" or "python" depending on pyarrow being installed.
- (2) "pyarrow_numpy" is kept temporarily because this is already in a released

>   version, but we can deprecate it in 2.x and have it removed for 3.0.

Reviewer 2: I think the deprecation comment here should be more definitive, i.e., "this PDEP proposes to deprecate it in 2.x and have it removed for 3.0"

For the new default string dtype, only the `"str"` alias can be used to
specify the dtype as a string, i.e. pandas would not provide a way to make the
underlying storage (pyarrow or python) explicit through the string alias. This
string alias is only a convenience shortcut and for most users `"str"` is
sufficient (they don't need to specify the storage), and the explicit
`pd.StringDtype(storage=..., na_value=np.nan)` is still available for more
fine-grained control.

Also for the existing variant using `pd.NA`, specifying the storage through the

> string alias could be deprecated, but that is left for a separate decision.

Reviewer 2: Will there be an API to query the storage?  I.e., if you did `pd.Series(["abc", "def"], dtype="str")`, could you query whether the storage was `pyarrow` or `python` ?

Author: I explicitly mentioned that the new dtype reuses the existing `StringDtype` class, and that does have a `.storage` attribute. So no plans to change that.

- (1) You get "pyarrow" or "python" depending on pyarrow being installed.
- (2) "pyarrow_numpy" is kept temporarily because this is already in a released

>   version, but it will be deprecated it in 2.x and removed for 3.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  version, but it will be deprecated in 2.x and removed for 3.0.
```

### Naming alternatives

An initial version of this PDEP proposed to use the `"string"` alias and the
default `pd.StringDtype()` class constructor for the new default dtype.
However, that caused a lot of discussion around backwards compatibility for

> existing users of the `StringDtype` using `pd.NA`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
existing users of `dtype=pd.StringDtype()` and `dtype="string"`, that uses `pd.NA` to represent missing values.
```
